---
title: 'Making Research Data Flow With Python'
abstract: |
  The increasing volume of research data in fields such as astronomy, biology,
  and engineering necessitates efficient distributed data management.
  Traditional commercial solutions are often unsuitable for the decentralized
  infrastructure typical of academic projects. This paper presents the
  Librarian, a custom framework designed for data transfer in large academic
  collaborations, designed for the Simons Observatory (SO) as a ground up
  re-architechture of a previous astronomical data management tool called the
  'HERA Librarian' from which it takes its name. SO is a new-generation
  observatory designed for observing the Cosmic Microwave Background, and is
  located in the Atacama desert in Chile at over 5000 meters of elevation.

  Existing tools like Globus Flows, iRODS, Rucio, and Datalad were evaluated
  but were found to be lacking in automation or simplicity. Librarian
  addresses these gaps by integrating with Globus for efficient data transfer
  and providing a RESTful API for easy interaction. It also supports transfers
  through the movement of physical media for environments with intermittent
  connectivity.

  Using technologies like Python, FastAPI, and SQLAlchemy, the Librarian
  ensures robust, scalable, and user-friendly data management tailored to the
  needs of large-scale scientific projects. This solution demonstrates an
  effective method for managing the substantial data flows in modern 'big
  science' endeavors.
---

## Introduction

Research data is ever-growing, with even small projects now producing terabytes
of data. This has been matched by an increase in the typical size of workstation
storage and compute, but as many fields like astronomy, biology, and engineering
continue their march towards 'big science', distributed data analysis is
becoming significantly more common. As such, there is a significant need for
software that can seamlessly track and move data between sites without
continuous human intervention. For the very largest of these projects (such as
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN), massive development effort has been invested
to create technologies for data pipelining, but these tools typically assume a
high level of control over the software and hardware that is running for the
project.

At the same time, data science and data analytics are becoming a larger part of
industrial infrastructure, even in what appear to be non-technical fields like
law, commerce, and media. This has led to a huge increase in data engineering
and pipelining software, but this software is generally only available through
private clouds like those provided by Amazon (Amazon Web Services), Microsoft
(Azure), and Alphabet (Google Cloud). These services generally assume that there
is an ingest point into one of their managed storage (e.g. Amazon S3), using
their compute and tools for analysis (e.g. Amazon Athena and Amazon EC2), and
their tools for final data egress (e.g. Amazon API Gateway or Amazon
QuickSight). These resources are mature, performant, and a result of hundreds of
thousands or millions of developer-hours. However, they are not compatible with
the current publicly-funded science model, or the way that large, distributed,
academic collaborations work.

A monolithic stack like those provided by public clouds is almost antithetical
to large, distributed, academic projects. In these projects, funding may come
from a vast array of sources (e.g. faculty members funded through their
institution, large funding agencies like the National Science Foundation, or
more junior members funded through individual fellowships), and compute may be
provided by many different providers at different scales (e.g. on-premises with
the data source, small institutional Tier-2 or Tier-3 centers, or
international-scale Tier-0 centers through an allocation). Pooling these funds
and resources is an almost insurmountable challenge; aside from some $10 B+
projects, even 'massive' multi-hundred million dollar projects must design their
staffing, software, and procedures for a level of flexibility (and, by
corollary, simplicity) that would be incomprehensible in an industrial context.

This paper is about solving the base-level problem: how to get raw experiment
data totaling around 1 PB a year from a remote site (in our case, the top of a
mountain in Chile), to various science consumers distributed across the globe.
Our data is comprised of folders (termed 'books'), each containing 10-20 GB of
data, laid out in a pre-determined scheme in a POSIX filesystem.

## Comparing Data Flows

```{figure} ./Display.svg
:name: fig-display
Showing a typical layout of a commercial data engineering structure (top) versus
an academic one (bottom). In a commercial context, it is typical that a
significantly higher fraction of the resources are owned (or are directly
configurable, e.g. cloud services) by the user. It is also much more common to
have a centralised 'data warehouse' or 'data lake' which provides ingress and
egress for all data products. In the academic context, only a very small
fraction of the compute and storage are typically owned by stakeholders.
National facilities, and even local clusters at universities, are typically
rigid and cannot be re-configured to better suit the needs of an individual
experiment. Further, due to limited compute and storage constraints, it is
likely that multiple copies of experimental data must be kept at various sites,
and tight control needs to be maintained on the specific sub-sets of data stored
at each.
```

In @fig-display, we show two example data flows: one for a commercial enterprise
(on the top), and one for a typical academic project (bottom; this matches
closely with the needs of the Simons Observatory).

A typical challenge for the commercial scenario is collating data from many
different sources, and processing it in a latency-sensitive manner. Consider an
e-commerce platform, which has sales data, market research, and user tracking
data, which all need to be collected and normalised to make decisions. This
data, though varied, is typically small (and all 'owned' in some sense by the
company), meaning that it can all be placed inside one centralised data
warehouse from which analysis can be performed, and data egress can take place
(often through a shared service). Because these services must all be directly
acquired by the business, they are all at a bare minimum highly configurable and
scalable. It can hence make sense to either use a series of interconnecting
services (e.g. those provided through the Apache Software Foundation if using
on-premises hardware), or a managed service collection (e.g. using tools from
AWS). The data flows, represented by arrows in this case, are then made much
simpler, and specific business logic can be programmed around the assumption of
a shared and well-known interface; this hence leads to our understanding of
these interconnected services through the data producers, flows, and products.

For an academic project, there is usually one major data source, and analysis is
usually compute-intensive. This could be an experiment or, in our case, an
observatory. Connected to this experiment there is typically a small on-site
data storage and analysis facility that repackages data and can perform simple
analysis. Those running the experiment usually have complete control over only
this platform; the rest are highly locked-down shared computing services like
national facilities (e.g. NERSC) and university-managed clusters - funding
agencies typically do not support the purchase of significant compute resources,
as they maintain shared high performance computing clusters. An important
corollary to this is that different facilities may have different resources
available, for instance cold storage for archival data, accelerators, or
high-memory nodes. Data must be managed with the understanding that these
resources may have finite lifetimes, may be withdrawn, or replaced at a
completely different site. Further, as there is no centralised provider, data
replication must be managed 'manually' by the collaboration through their
network of shared machines, both for integrity and for availability at the sites
that have different compute resources. Working on the data, specific archival
products are produced: either those included in a data release (e.g. images,
maps, etc.), and publications. Both regulation and community standards typically
leads to these products being _immutable_ and available _forever_, hosted by an
external service. This reliance on external compute and storage leads to our
understanding of this workflow through the flow of data into and out of the
aforementioned providers.

Though they may have varied locations and resources, the computing centers are
all usually organised in a broadly similar way, with dedicated data ingest (or
transfer) nodes with a fast 'grid' internet connection (e.g. Internet2 in the
U.S., JISC in the U.K., etc.) and access to shared disks. Compute is managed via
a job scheduler (e.g. slurm), with file storage provided on GPFS or Lustre (i.e.
POSIX-like, not object store) systems. As such, much of the community software
has been built with the strong assumption that data is stored in files on a
high-performance POSIX-compliant filesystem, with analysis performed through job
submission to compute nodes. Any data management system for such projects must
hence be designed to be compatible with this workflow.

In the specific case of the Simons Observatory [@Ade2019], we have a need for a
piece of software to bring down data from our observatory at the rate of around
20 TB a week. This is accomplished using SneakerNet, where physical media is
used to transport data, and a fiber internet connection. Our data is immutable,
and in the form of 'books' (structured directories of binary data), within a
pre-determined directory structure that must be replicated exactly on all of the
downstream sites. At certain downstream sites, we have space for all of the data
from the entire project, but at others only a recent, rolling, sub-set may be
maintained.

### Existing Software

Because of the significantly different constraints in the academic world versus
the commercial world, there is a relatively limited set of tools that can be
used to accomplish the goal of automated data management and transfer. In our
search, we evaluated the following tools:

#### Globus

Globus [@Foster2011;@Allen2012] is a non-profit service from the University of
Chicago, and specialises in the batch transfer of large data products. Globus
works by having an 'endpoint server' running at each location, which can
communicate over HTTP. Through the use of their web interface, API, or
command-line client, it is possible to request asynchronous transfers of massive
amounts of data, which are transferred at close to line speeds thanks to GridFTP
being used for the underlying data movement. Globus is used extensively in the
academic community, and is already available ubiquitously throughout the
academic cluster ecosystem.

Globus, however, is not an automated tool; in general, one must tell Globus how,
where, and when to move data. It is possible to set up recurring
synchronisations of data, but this either requires complete copy at all sites
(lest data that was just deleted be moved again) or that all sub-tasks be
expressible as part of a 'Globus Flow', which may not always be possible. As
such, Globus is more of a 'data transfer' tool, than a data management tool. It
does not have significant cataloguing capability.

#### Rucio and iRODS

Rucio [@Rucio2019] is a distributed data management system that was originally
designed for the ATLAS high-energy physics experiment at the LHC, and as such is
extremely scalable (i.e. exabytes or more). Rucio can be backed by different
levels of storage, from fast (SSD) to slow (tape), and is declarative (meaning
that one simply asks the system to follow a set of rules, like 'keep three
copies of the data'), with its own user and permissions management system. Rucio
is an exceptionally capable piece of software, but this comes with significant
complexity. Further, data is managed externally to the underlying filesystem
and permissions model of the host, potentially causing issues with the user
agreements at shared facilities, and interacting with data generally requires
interaction with the Rucio API. Though Rucio is certainly a fantastic tool, we
found that it was too integrated for our needs of simply transferring data, and
the declarative system is incompatible with our need to leverage SneakerNet.

A similar, albeit older and more mature, project to Rucio is iRODS (the
integrated rule-oriented data system; @iRODS2024). iRODS, being more mature,
integrates nicely with lots of software (providing a FUSE mount, FTP client
integration, and more), and can likely be a perfect solution for someone looking
for fully integrated data management. However, as it is built on a foundation of
rule-based data management, it was discovered to be incompatible with our need
to tightly control the specific transfers taking place.

#### Datalad and git-annex

The git-annex [@GitAnnex2024] tool is an extension to Git, the version control
system, to handle large quantities of binary data. Due to its extensive use by
home and small business users, it explicitly supports SneakerNet transfers
between sites, but is hampered by the fact that it relies on Git to track files
(though not explicitly their contents; git-annex tracks checksums instead),
which can become slow as repository size scales.

Datalad [@Halchenko2021] is effectively a frontend for git-annex with a
significant feature pool, and is used extensively in the bioscience community.
For projects with small-to-medium size data needs, Datalad would be an
exceptional candidate, but as we expect to need to manage multiple petabytes of
data over a variety of storage needs, it was unfortunately not appropriate for
the Simons Observatory.

## The Librarian

After much consideration, the collaboration decided that building an
orchestration and tracking framework on top of Globus was most appropriate. In
addition, there was an existing piece of software used for the Hydrogen Epoch of
Reionization Array (HERA) [@DeBoer2017], a radio telescope designed to study the
early Universe, called the 'HERA Librarian' [@LaPlante2020; @LaPlante2021] that
provided some of the abstractions that were required, though it was not suitable
for production use for the much larger Simons Observatory. The HERA Librarian
used a significant number of shell commands over SSH in its underlying
architecture, and was designed to be fully synchronous. This lead to a complete
re-write of the Librarian, primarily to eliminate these deficiencies, but also
to migrate the application to a more modern web framework. There are a few key
design concepts that were carried over from the HERA Librarian:

- There is a distinction drawn between 'Files' and 'Instances' of files in
  the Librarian; a given server may know that 'File' exists but not actually
  have direct access to a copy of the underlying data.
- Files are immutable, enforced through checksumming, making synchronization
  between Librarians uni-directional and much simpler.
- Instances of the Librarian server are free-standing and are loosely-coupled,
  meaning that long outages or network downtime do not cause significant
  issues.

The Librarian[^librarian] is made up of five major pieces:

1. A FastAPI[^fastapi] server that allows access through a REST HTTP API.
2. A database server (postgres[^postgres] in production, SQLite[^sqlite] for
   development) to track state and provide atomicity.
3. A background task[^schedule] thread that performs data-intensive operations
   like checksumming, local cloning, and scheduling of transfers.
4. A background transfer thread that manages the transfer queue and communicates
   with Globus to query status.
5. A Python and associated command-line client for interacting with the API.

Crucially, the background threads can directly access the database, without
having to interact with the HTTP server. This reduces the level of 'CRUD'
(create, read, update, delete) API code that is required for the project
significantly, by allowing (e.g.) locking of database rows currently being
transferred directly, rather than having this be handled through a series of API
calls. These background tasks are scheduled automatically using the lightweight
`schedule` library.

The Librarian is a specialized tool that excels in reproducing the data and
layout of a POSIX-compatible filesystem on a system with downstream nodes in a
loosely-coupled manner, all whilst maintaining tight control on _how_ data is
transferred. The Librarian is open source and available through
GitHub[^librarian], under the BSD-2-Clause license.

### Technology Choices

For this project, it was crucial that we used the Python language, as this is
the lingua franca of the collaboration; all members have at least some knowledge
of Python. No other language comes close (by a significant margin), and all
analysis tools use Python. In addition, Globus provide a complete source
development kit for Python[^globussdk]. As our analysis tools will eventually
communicate with the Librarian, and its REST API, it also made sense to employ
pydantic[^pydantic] to develop the communication schema. By using pydantic, we
could ensure that responses and requests were serialized and de-serialized by
the exact same models, reducing both development time and errors significantly.
With pydantic models as our base data structure, it was natural to choose
FastAPI for the web server component.

In an ideal case, we would have used SQLModel to further reduce code duplication
in the database layer. However, at the outset of the project,
SQLModel[^sqlmodel] was still in very early development, and as such it made
sense to use SQLAlchemy[^sqlalchemy] as our object-relational mapping (ORM) to
translate database operations to object manipulation.

### Service Layout

```{figure} ./Ingest.svg
:name: fig-ingest
Showing data ingest (green) and cloning between Librarian instances (orange).
Data flows from the experiment, through a staging area, and to a main store,
before being picked up by the background task (clocks) and copied by Globus in
the background to the remote staging area. On the remote end, once the data is
marked as being staged, the background task picks it up, checksums it, and it is
marked as stored. More information on this process is available in the main
text.
```

The Librarian service is relatively simple; it allows for the ingestion of
'files' (which can themselves be directories containing many files) into a
unified namespace, and this namespace can be synchronised with other sites using
Globus. In this section we will give a brief overview of the key abstractions at
place and the data flow within the application. This process is summarised in
@fig-ingest.

In contrast to many other tools, and to the 'HERA Librarian' which preceeded the
Librarian, files carry minimal science metadata along with them through the
system. We found that metadata systems attached to data flow and management
systems often lacked necessary features and caused significant complications
(such as needing frequent database migrations) when coupled. As such, we chose
to explicitly delegate metadata management to other subsystems within the
project, focusing only on file transfers.

#### User and Librarian Management

During the initial setup of the system, an administrator user is provisioned to
facilitate further management tasks. This primary administrator has the ability
to create additional user accounts through the `librarian` command-line tool.

Both 'users' (i.e. those interacting with the system to ingest data) and
'Librarians' (other copies of the application running on other systems) need
accounts. These accounts can be configured with different levels of permissions
to suit various needs. Specifically, accounts can be granted full administrator
privileges, read and append only privileges, or callback-only privileges.
Callback-only privalages are crucial for remote sites like telescopes, as they
ensure that downstream Librarians only have extremely limited access to both the
underlying data and its associated metadata. To ensure security, user passwords
are salted and hashed in the database using the Argon2[^argon2] algorithm. The
API employs HTTP Basic Authentication for user verification and access control.

#### Storage Management

In the Librarian system, storage is abstracted into entities known as 'stores'.
These stores are provisioned during the setup process and can be migrated with a
server restart. Each store comprises two components: a staging area for ingested
files and a main store area, which has a global namespace for permanently
storing data. While stores can have any underlying structure, they must provide
methods for both ingestion and egress of data. In all current use cases, we
employ a 'local store', which is a thin wrapper around a POSIX filesystem.

Stores provide two methods for data ingestion: transfer managers and async
transfer managers. Transfer managers are synchronous, and for the 'local store',
this involves a simple local file copy. Async transfer managers, on the other
hand, are asynchronous and are used for inter-Librarian transfers, typically
employing Globus for this purpose. Individual storage items are referred to as
'files', which can denote either individual files or directories.

Stores on the same device log all the 'instances' of 'files' they contain in the
database. Additionally, all files can have 'remote instances', which are known
instances of files located on another Librarian.

#### Data Ingestion

Data ingestion follows a systematic process using accounts that have read and
append privileges. Initially, a request to upload is made to the Librarian web
server prompting it to create a temporary UUID-named directory in the staging
area. Simultaneously, the client computes a checksum for the file. The server
then provides this UUID and a set of transfer managers to the client.

Next, the client selects the most appropriate transfer manager to copy the file
to the staging area. Once the file transfer is complete, the client informs the
server of the completion. The server then verifies that the checksum matches the
one provided in the upload request. If the checksums are consistent, the server
ingests the file into the storage area.

From the client's perspective, the upload is extremely simple:

```python
from hera_librarian import LibrarianClient
from hera_librarian.settings import client_settings
from pathlib import Path

client_info = client_settings.connections.get(
    "my_librarian_name"
)

client = LibrarianClient.from_info(client_info)

client.upload(
    Path("name_of_a_file_on_disk.txt"),
    Path("/hello/world/this/is/a/file.txt")
)
```

This then leads to a synchronous uploading of the local file to the global
namespace, with `upload` returning once this is complete and, crucially, the
upload is verified (via a checksum) by the server. For most applications,
this fire-and-forget technique is all that is required; if `upload` returns
successfully, the file is guaranteed to have been correctly uploaded to
the server and is ready for use and export.

#### Data Cloning

Data can be cloned in two main ways: locally and remotely. Local cloning
involves making a copy to a different store on the same Librarian, which is
often used for SneakerNet. This process is straightforward and handled by a
single task that creates a copy on the second device and updates the database.

Remote cloning, on the other hand, is a more complex, multi-stage process.
Initially, files without remote instances on the target Librarian are collated
into a list. Outgoing transfers are then created in the database to track
progress. These transfers are grouped into batches of 128 to 1024 files to be
packaged in a single Globus transfer, due to the limitation that there can only
be 100 listed Globus transfers.

A request is made to the destination Librarian to batch stage clones of these
files, creating a UUID directory for each. The batch transfer is placed in the
queue on the local Librarian. The transfer thread picks up this batch and sends
it using Globus, periodically polling for status updates on the transfer. Once
the transfer is complete, the source Librarian notifies the destination
Librarian that the files are staged. The 'receive clone' background task on the
destination Librarian picks up the staged files and verifies them against known
checksums. Once verified, the files are placed in the main store, and a callback
is generated to the source Librarian to complete the transfer and register a new
remote instance.

#### Data Access

Data can be accessed through the Librarian, by querying it for the location of
individual instances of a file. However, because our stores generally just wrap
the POSIX filesystem, users typically already know a-priori where the files that
they need to access are, through the use of other science product databases. As
such, data access is generally as simple as opening the file; it is where users
expect it to be.

### Data Down the Mountain

```{figure} ./Sneaker.svg
:name: fig-sneaker
Showing the SneakerNet flow between two Librarian instances. The sneaker drive
is physically moved between computing sites, alongside a manifest of all files
on the drive, to complete transfers in large batches.
```

In the specific case of an observatory, there is an additional challenge here:
lines representing data flows in @fig-ingest no longer simply show bytes sent
over HTTP connections to highly available services, but instead represent
potentially interruptible inter-continental data movement. In the specific case
of the Simons Observatory, the main data flow from the telescope (which is at
5000 meters above sea level in the Atacama Desert) to the main computing center
(NERSC, a national facility on the west coast of the U.S.) is fraught with
challenges.

The main internet connection from the telescope to the nearest town was, for a
long time, a low-bandwidth radio link. This has now been (thankfully) replaced
with a high throughput fiber connection, but given that this link may go down at
any time due to the remote placement of the site (and no backup), another way to
offload the data is required. The observatory produces around 20 TB of data a
week, which is much more than the 50 MBit/s radio link can transfer; either way,
that bandwidth is required for other uses. This necessitates a more primitive
solution: so-called 'SneakerNet' transfers, where data is carried by hand on
physical media.

SneakerNet transfers are supported natively by the Librarian, and occur through
the following steps (as shown in @fig-sneaker):

- A new store is provisioned that refers to the mounted drive that will be
  carried in the process.
- A local clone background task catches up on missing files to this drive and,
  as new files come in, copies them too.
- Once full, the server sends an alert (implemented using Slack notifications)
  to administrators.
- Administrators use the command-line Librarian tools to generate a 'manifest'
  of all files on the device: their checksums, names, etc.
- The drive is hand-carried to the destination, and ingested.
- The Librarian command-line tools are again used to ingest the manifest and
  copied files.
- As the files are ingested, HTTP callbacks are made to the source Librarian to
  convert the local 'instance' rows on the sneaker drive to 'remote instance' rows
  for the destination Librarian.
- The drive is re-formatted and carried back.

This is an unusual process, but comes in extremely handy in bandwidth
constrained, remote, environments.

### Testing

Testing complex data flows like those represented in the Librarian is a
notoriously difficult task. For instance, testing the components that make up
the SneakerNet workflow means being able to test two interacting web-servers,
each backed by a database, with several additional threads running in the
background. To aid with this goal, we make heavy use of dependency injection and
integration testing, alongside more traditional unit testing.

For services that cannot be 'easily' replicated, like Globus, we make sure to
always use dependency injection. Dependency injection is a technique where
downstream functions and objects 'receive' the things that they require as
arguments or parameters. One significant example where this is used in the
Librarian is the transfer managers: by having the server tell the client how it
can move data, you can return appropriate managers for testing. Instead of using
a Globus transfer (which requires setting up an external server, and registering
it with Globus), one can instead return a transfer manager that simply wraps
`rsync` or a local copy instead, and test all the same code paths except the one
line that actually moves the data. The component that performs the Globus
transfer is then tested separately in a more appropriate environment, ensuring
that it conforms to the exact same specification as the local copy manager.
Another example is our database: thanks to SQLAlchemy, and appropriate design
patterns, we can very easily swap out our production postgres database for
SQLite during development, enabling much more simple testing patterns.

In an attempt to avoid 'dependency hell', we have developed a testing platform
that heavily leverages `pytest-xprocess`[^xprocess] and pytest fixtures. Using
this tool, one can create a real, live, running Librarian server in a separate
process. This is used to test the interaction between client and server, and for
end-to-end tests of the SneakerNet and inter-Librarian cloning process. Because
this server is running locally, it makes it possible to directly query the
database for testing, which we have found to be invaluable. The only drawback to
this approach is that it is not possible to get test coverage for the lines that
are performed inside the `xprocess` fork.

### Deployment Details

As we have made a relatively straightforward selection of technologies, and the
fact that the Librarian is a small application (less than 10'000 lines),
deployment is a simple process. In addition, it makes it straightforward to
explain the code paths that are taken by the Librarian.

Currently, we deploy Librarian using Docker. We require one container for the
FastAPI server, and one for postgres, which are usually linked using helm charts
(at NERSC) or docker compose (on other systems). We provide access to the
database for Grafana dashboards, and have Slack integrations for both logging
and notifications.

The focus on simplicity that we have made for the Librarian has made deployment
simple; system administrators within the academic community are very familiar
with Globus, and have been happy to assist with deployments of Librarian
orchestration framework.

## Conclusions

In this paper, we addressed the significant challenges faced by large academic
collaborations in managing and transferring massive datasets across distributed
sites. We evaluated existing data management tools such as Globus Flows, Rucio,
iRODS, and Datalad, identifying their limitations in terms of automation,
complexity, and compatibility with academic workflows.

Our solution, the Librarian was developed to meet these specific needs. By
integrating with Globus, Librarian enables efficient, asynchronous data
transfers. The system also supports SneakerNet, which is essential for
environments with limited or intermittent connectivity like our observatory,
facilitating physical data transfers through portable storage.

The use of widely adopted technologies such as Python, FastAPI, and SQLAlchemy
ensures that Librarian is robust, scalable, and user-friendly. Its design aligns
well with the decentralized and diverse infrastructure typical of academic
projects, providing a practical and efficient method for handling the immense
data flows inherent in modern 'big science' endeavors.

Librarian has demonstrated its effectiveness through its deployment at the
Simons Observatory, highlighting its potential as a versatile and reliable data
management solution for large-scale scientific collaborations. We provide
Librarian as free, open source, software to the community.

[^librarian]: https://github.com/simonsobs/librarian
[^fastapi]: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com
[^postgres]: https://www.postgresql.org
[^sqlite]: https://www.sqlite.org
[^schedule]: https://schedule.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
[^globussdk]: https://globus-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
[^pydantic]: https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/
[^sqlmodel]: https://sqlmodel.tiangolo.com
[^sqlalchemy]: https://www.sqlalchemy.org
[^argon2]: https://pypi.org/project/argon2-cffi/
[^xprocess]: https://pytest-xprocess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

## Acknowledgements

JB acknowledges support from NSF grant AST-2153201. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos. 1636646 and 1836019 and institutional support from the HERA collaboration partners. This research is funded in part by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation through Grant GBMF5212 to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
