:author: Dominik Klaes
:email: dklaes@astro.uni-bonn.de
:institution: Argelander-Institute for Astronomy, Bonn, Germany

------------------------------------------------
Teaching Python to undergraduate students
------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

Teaching undergraduate students in programming is interesting and challenging at 
the same time, because one has to deal mostly with two types of students: Those 
who have already experience with programming and those who have not. I will 
present two models from Bonn University for Physics students with now much more 
responsibility for the tutors. In the past, the different topics like LaTeX, 
plotting, Linux, data handling and fitting were shown and explained in detail in 
the lecture and the tutorials just contained exercises. Now, there is for each 
topic only one \``main'' lecture with an overview and all details, explanations 
and exercises are done in the tutorials. With this talk, I would like to 
initiate a discussion about different solutions to teach programming, especially 
Python, to undergraduate students. This shall be done during the SciPy 
conference and later in a provided forum.


.. class:: keywords

   Python, teaching, undergraduate, students, physics, astrophysics


Introduction
------------

In many university courses one needs sooner or later a computer which can help 
with or solve a certain problem. Students starting their courses at a University 
do not have necessarily experience with a computer beyond mailing and chatting. 
To ensure that especially those students can catch up and also those, who have 
already more experience in e.g. programming, can still learn something, there 
exist a course called \``Introduction to computer science and programming'' for 
Physics students at the University of Bonn. Unfortunately not all universities 
offer such a course for their students, they just expect that the students 
already have the required knowledge (see below) or learn it in their free time. 
Also, especially due to the crowded curriculum, there is no extra space for a 
dedicated programming course. Later in their courses, students need several 
aspects of this course again, especially:


1. How to find help / information
2. Basic Unix knowledge
3. LaTeX
4. Plotting
5. Data fitting
6. Programming and debugging


In the past, this course, which takes place every two semesters, consisted of 
two parts: A weekly 1-hour-lecture and a weekly 2-hours-exercise class. Due to 
the experience of 6 years, so also including two \``sets'' of Bachelor in 
Physics (3 years) and Master in Physics or Astrophysics (2 years) students, and 
changing small aspects already in between, it became clear that this course has 
to be changed completely. In the following, I will explain the basics of our 
program, so that the changes we made will become more reasonable.


A general comment on these kind of skills: Many professors assume that the 
students already have those skills or if not, they are able to learn it on their 
own. While this might be right up to a certain extent, one has to keep in mind 
that Physics programms are a full-time program, so time for extra work is very 
limited. Also one has to keep in mind that it looks easier for people who have 
worked with Python for a long time already and so one normally underestimates 
the time needed for learning Python.


Basics
------

The Bachelor in Physics (duration: 6 terms, 3 years) and the Master in 
(Astro)Physics (duration: 4 terms, 2 years) both require a lot of computer 
knowledge for different aspects. Both programs consist of so called \``modules'' 
which normally cover one topic of the education. These modules were introduced 
in Europe through the \``Bologna Process'' (also known as \``Bologna 
Reform'') [#]_ in 1999 which should in principle allow the students to 
change the university during their studies very easily. This required some 
changes in the courses themselves and also some \``generalized'' calculations of 
the workload of individual courses so that they can compared to each other, 
especially between different countries, where the university systems differ 
significantly. Besides this module aspect, there are two more important 
properties I will use later: the \``credit points'' and the \``SWS'' (German: 
**S**\ emester\ **w**\ ochen\ **s**\ tunden).

.. [#] More information can be found on the official website (http://www.ehea.info/) or, for a short overview, also on Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bologna_Process).

Credit points reflect the average total amount of time a student has to spend 
for a module including lecture time, exercise class time, time to solve exercise 
sheets and also preparing for the final exam(s), which is normally a written or 
oral exam, a presentation, a report or something similar. It was defined that 1 
credit point (CP) is equivalent to 30 hours work. This also allows to weight 
different modules so that a module with more credit points (so more work) can be 
weighted more in the final, averaged grade. Every semester is designed such that 
about 30 CPs per semester are obtained.

SWS gives the number of hours per week  the student is at the university, so normally 
lecture and exercise class time. This allows the student to judge how much time 
he or she has to spend at the university and how much time has to be used to 
prepare the lectures / exercises and rework the materials.


Usage of skills
---------------

This part will explain which skills are needed during the studies and are 
obtained during the compulsory EDP module. For this purpose, the numeration used 
in the introduction is used.


1. How to find help / information: One might assume that high school students 
know how to get additional information for a certain problem using e.g. Google 
which they used for homeworks or presentations. While some students do not have 
any problems with using such a search engine, the others do not know how to use 
it efficiently, e.g. showing only the newest search hits or from a certain 
website or excluding specific search words. This then increases the time 
students need for their self-studying at all stages of their studies: looking up 
formulas, checking the syntax of a command or looking for the solution of a 
(programming) problem. One can say that for undergraduate students and their 
problems there is at least another person who already had the same or similar 
problem and provides a solution. On the other side this reduces the ability 
and/or motivation to think first about a problem, so a compromise has to be 
found.

2. Basic Unix knowledge: Most of the first year students have only basic 
knowledge of an operating system, normally Windows. In (Astro)Physics Unix 
operating systems, normally Linux, are mostly used. In the last decade, Linux 
and its usage has improved a lot and for GUI users there are only a few small 
differences for basic Windows users which simplifies the usage and the first 
contact for those students. Also here the first programming skills can be 
obtained even without being noticed by the students by writing small shell 
scripts.

3. LaTeX: LaTeX is widely used in the (astro)physics community to write 
scientific papers, thesis or presentations. In this Bachelor program the 
students can use their learned knowledge directly at the end of this course by 
writing the report (including several tasks from the different topics). It is 
compulsory to hand in the report using LaTeX. During their further studies they 
will use it during the laboratory courses (writing the reports), the 
presentation seminar where they learn how to create and give a good presentation 
(here LaTeX is optional, other programs are allowed to use) and finally their 
Bachelor thesis (LaTeX is not mandatory but especially when using formulas and 
references, LaTeX shows its enormous power). Especially in the beginning the 
students do not understand why one should use LaTeX because programs like 
Microsoft Word and PowerPoint or LibreOffice Writer and Impress do a sufficient 
job for the problems they had up to now. Especially the error messages and/or 
warnings LaTeX produces are not always easy to understand and even if, not 
directly solvable for someone without experience. Since LaTeX can be interpreted 
somehow as programming, and so code debugging is important, also the last point 
(\``Programming and debugging'') will become relevant again.

4. Plotting: *A picture is worth a thousand words.* This saying is also valid 
for a lot of numbers one has to deal with, e.g. from a measurement series. While 
this is well known, how to get from numbers to a \``good'' plot, so e.g. 
readable and understandable, is not easy at all. This starts with choosing the 
\``right'' program: A simple one like e.g. gnuplot, a tool like Mathematica or 
Maple, or directly a programming language like C + ROOT or Python + matplotlib? 
Also questions like style (color or b/w plot, line style, labels etc.) and 
formats (JPEG, (E)PS, PNG etc.) including differences have to be made clear. 
Only being aware of this guarantees up to a certain point \``good'' plots that 
everyone can read and understand. A quite recent example for a \``bad'' plot and 
font style is the Comic Sans font style from the CERN higgs boson discovery 
slides in 2012 [ComicSans]_.

5. Data fitting: Having only data does not help anyone, the data has to be 
interpreted. Part of this is fitting a law or a formula to the data. For first 
year Bachelor students it is difficult to understand what \``data'', including 
e.g. errors, is and how to work with it because this is normally not taught in 
high school or if it is taught, only basics are available. This knowledge is 
especially used during the laboratory courses and if applicable during the 
Bachelor thesis. Handling, fitting and interpreting data is one of the basic 
tools that a scientist should be able to use. Furthermore knowledge about the 
different ways to fit data (unweighted, weighted) or different methods (e.g. 
:math:`\chi ^{2}`) is essential, not only for laboratory courses.

6. Programming and debugging: Most of our first year Bachelor students do not 
have any experience with programming. As already explained before, programming 
has become very important over the last decade and is required nowadays in 
(Astro)Physics. Unfortunately there is not **the** programming language that 
contains all needed tools, is easy to learn and use, compatible with many 
different computer architectures and so on. Also looking into the different 
working groups does not solve the problem: Currently languages like C/C++ and 
Python are very common but also Fortan and Perl are still used, especially 
because older programs are written in these languages, it would take a lot of 
time and man power to translate the code into a \``newer'' language and to test 
it. Compared to the other already mentioned topics, this part could only be 
broached in the past, which means in terms of time only 1 to 1.5 out of 12 
lectures and exercise classes at the end of the lecture time when also almost 
all students concentrate more on the exam preparations.


Past vs. present
----------------

Starting in 2006, the EDP module has evolved and improved over the last years. 
In the beginning this course consisted of a weekly one-hour-lecture and a weekly 
two-hours-exercise class. The lecture was used to present the theoretical 
background, followed by a live demonstration. Since this lecture took place in a 
lecture hall and not in the CIP pool, only a few students had a computer (their 
laptop) which they can use to directly repeat the shown examples (this was also 
mentioned by the students in the lecture survey carried out by the student 
representatives. Due to this, questions that can occur while trying out the 
examples could not be raised directly. This also means that the lecturer gets 
less feedback to improve the lecture and its style. Another consequence was also 
that less and less students attended the lecture since there is no compulsory 
attendance in our lectures. All this made the lecture more or less obsolete but 
cannot be dropped due to regulations so that all problems and questions were 
shifted into the exercise class and the tutor had to deal with them. For this, 
two hours per week is not enough, especially because the students prioritize 
their work and besides a mathematics and an experimental physics lecture, this 
lecture and exercise class appears not very important for them. Influences on 
the time spent on preparation are obvious. To do the splits between the 
regulations for the Bachelor, the workload for the students and tutors and the 
efficient time usage, it was tested to switch to one \``main'' lecture every few 
weeks for each \``main'' topic such as Linux, LaTeX and programming, and a 
weekly three-hours-exercise class. This enhances the possibility for the 
students to see how to solve a certain problem, test this solution on their own 
and, if there are questions left, directly ask the tutor who can directly help 
and give individual advices. In this solution, the tutors have much more 
responsibility for the education of the students and in times when it is 
sometimes complicated to get tutors at all, a complicated issue.

Besides this change, the topics that should be covered were also discussed. 
Depending on the lecturer, different topics were chosen, e.g. one year learnt 
Mathematica, another year Maple. The overall problem but was that the students 
did not get any programming experience (here bash scripting in the sense of only 
executing several commands without e.g. if-statements do not count as 
\``programming'') which they need later in the 4th semester for the \``Numerical 
Methods of Physics'' lecture and probably for their Bachelor thesis. To solve 
this problem, the student representatives (also called \``Fachschaft'' in 
Germany) organized a voluntary C programming course in the semester break before 
the 4th semester. This might sounds like a good idea but costs a lot of time 
during the semester break when the students also have a laboratory course and a 
preparation lecture for this in parallel. To avoid this problem, it was decided 
to include Python into the EDP lecture besides Linux and LaTeX, and skip the 
other topics (Mathematica, Maple) or move them to other modules (fitting).


Why Python and not e.g. C?
--------------------------

Two of the important differences between Python and C for a beginner are the 
declaration of variables (and how to use them) and the principles of pointers. 
Starting with something new, the ideal case would be to get a ready-to-use 
program without caring too much about details and different data types like 
integers, floats, doubles and so on (but later on these become important 
again!). Here, Python takes care of all memory related issues and gives the 
beginner time to understand how programming works and does not overload him/her 
with too many details. Later on, when one has more experience, one can still 
dive into those details. Another advantage of Python is that it forces the user 
to write \``nice'' code, meaning using tabulators or space to indent code, e.g. 
after an if-statement. This makes the code much more readable and understable.


Furthermore Python allows an interactive mode with e.g. IPython or Python 
Notebooks. This especially becomes interesting and important when one tries to 
explain how to debug code. Python allows to go through the code line by line and 
directly check e.g. the values of variables (this is to a certain extent also 
possible with C with additional programs). This also means that one can modify 
the problematic line and test the solution directly without compiling and 
running the entire script again. Furthermore, with IPython Notebook, it is also 
not longer needed that the students install software in their own laptop or 
login on a machine in the university, but running it on a sever via a web 
broweser.Up to now the advantages of Python Notebooks are not used by the 
lecturer, but probably tested in the next term as part of the exercise sheets.


There are also other programming languages available such as e.g. Fortran, R, 
Matlab etc. The reasons why those were not discussed at all are simply they are 
too old (e.g. Fortran even if a lot of used programs are still using this 
language) and/or are simply not used by the majority of the research groups in 
Bonn. Also, for Matlab, many commands work in Python (matplotlib) so the 
students see only one program (Python) with \``add-ons'' and not different 
programs for different tasks which also reduces the inhibition level for the 
students.


During one year of Bachelor students it was tried to teach ROOT for fitting / 
plotting without teaching C because in the older curriculum there was not enough 
time to teach both in detail and fitting / plotting was more important w.r.t. to 
the laboratory courses. The result was that without programming knowledge it was 
not completely understood by the students what they were actually doing. 
Compared to matplotlib, a lot of commands were needed for very simple plots such 
as plotting data.


Used Material
-------------

Besides the quality and style of the lecture itself, also the quality of the 
exercise sheets are important for the understanding of Python. For this purpose, 
material from \``Think Python'' [ThinkPython]_ is used. The exercise class then 
consists of preparation tasks for a certain chapter or part of a chapter, 
followed by an oral quiz in the class to check the knowledge and to point out 
problems that can occur. During the exercise class itself, the students are 
asked to solve several exercises, from the book and/or additional ones, on their 
own. Depending on the tutor, two ways of behaving are possible:

1. Discussing the exercises directly together or after some time. The advantage 
of this possibility is that all students get the final solution or at least 
enough hints to solve the task easily alone. From experience, one can say that 
students who are not confident enough to ask questions even in a group of about 
10 students, do not ask any questions and so can get easily lost. This becomes 
clear only weeks later when it already might be too late for them to catch up. 
In the end, these students do not learn a lot and those students, who already 
have programming experiences, are not challenged, so demotivated.

2. Letting the students work alone and only check from time to time their 
progress. This way allows every student to work on her/his own pace and also ask 
the tutor directly. Those students with more experience do not feel delayed by 
the other students and can, if they like, solve extra exercises that are 
designed for advanced programmers. This also means that there is much more time 
for the beginners with \``beginner problems''. This option also guarantees that 
the three hours are spent efficiently. One has to note that students might need 
some time to get used to this option because they might not be too familiar with 
working autonomously but also asking other students for help. This probably 
originates from the break between high school (teachers give the required 
material) and university (self-organization and -responsibility).

The author strongly supports the second option, also from his own experience 
students normally do not like a tutor that is checking their progress 
permanently or just going through the material. This does not leave enough time 
to think about what they have just learned and so arising questions might not be 
asked.


Conclusion and future
---------------------

Since the described changes have been applied the first time in 2013, there are 
currently no directly benefits for the students. These will become available in 
their fourth semeter when they have to attend the numercial methods for 
physicists lecture and so do not have to learn a programming language in a 
voluntary course. It might be expected that the failure rate in the \``exam'' 
(the report) increased due to the complexcity of a programming language for 
those without programming experience, but this is not the case. The main reason 
for this is that the students can write the report at home and also together 
with other students which is expected because this also increases the ability of 
working together with other students. The attendance of the students in the 
lecture dereased in the past dramatically shortly after the first few lectures 
but now, since it is concentrated and each lecture gives an overview over the 
next topic, the attendance is much better, almost comparable to the other 
lectures in the first semester.

In the exercise class itself the students are now able to ask more questions and 
the tutors can concentrate more on those students who have more problems with 
programming compared to the exercise classes of the voluntary courses (if the 
students are able to attend it at all, e.g. due to part-time jobs to finance 
their course).

For the future it will be evaluated if interactive material, such as IPython 
Notebook, will help the students even more to learn and understand Python.

For this SciPy conference, an overview of programming courses shall be set up, 
in the ideal case from many countries and also different courses / systems and 
also, if available, from high schools because here the base for further 
programming skills are set. This shall be done in the board under [Board]_. With 
a high response rate, and so available comparisons, one would be able to improve 
the way students learn programming, improve programming skills and perhaps also 
motivate and attract more students for programming since one spends more time on 
what one likes more.


References
----------
.. [Bachelor] http://tiny.iap.uni-bonn.de/mhb/bsc_grafik.pdf
.. [ComicSans] http://www.buzzfeed.com/babymantis/cern-uses-comics-sans-to-explain-higgs-boson-1opu
.. [ThinkPython] Allen Downey, *Think Python*, Green Tea Press, Version 2.0.10, May 2013
.. [Board] http://teachingpython.freeforums.org
