:author: Adam J Richards
:email: adam.richards@stat.duke.edu
:institution: Biostatistics \& Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA and Station d'Ecologie Experimentale du CNRS, Moulis, 09200, France.

:author: Andrzej S. Kosinski
:email: andrzej.kosinski@duke.edu
:institution: Biostatistics \& Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.

:author: Camille Bonneaud
:email: C.Bonneaud@exeter.ac.uk
:institution: Station d'Ecologie Experimentale du CNRS, Moulis, 09200, France and Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter Cornwall, Penryn, UK.

:author: Delphine Legrand
:email: legrand@dr14.cnrs.fr
:institution: Station d'Ecologie Experimentale du CNRS, Moulis, 09200, France.

:author: Kouros Owzar
:email: kouros.owzar@duke.edu
:institution: Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
lpEdit: an editor to facilitate reproducible analysis via literate programming
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

   There is evidence to suggest that a surprising proportion
   of published experiments in science are difficult if not impossible to
   reproduce. The concepts of data sharing, leaving an audit trail and
   extensive documentation are fundamental to reproducible research,
   whether it is in the laboratory or as part of an analysis. In this
   work, we introduce a tool for documentation that aims to make analyses
   more reproducible in the general scientific community.  
 
   The application, lpEdit, is a cross-platform editor, written with PyQt4,
   that enables a broad range of scientists to carry out the analytic
   component of their work in a reproducible manner—through the use of
   literate programming. Literate programming mixes code and prose to
   produce a final report that reads like an article or book. lpEdit
   targets researchers getting started with statistics or programming, so
   the hurdles associated with setting up a proper pipeline are kept to a
   minimum and the learning burden is reduced through the use of
   templates and documentation. The documentation for lpEdit is centered
   around learning by example, and accordingly we use several
   increasingly involved examples to demonstrate the software’s
   capabilities. 

   We first consider applications of lpEdit to process analyses mixing
   R and Python code with the :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` documentation
   system. Finally, we illustrate the use of lpEdit to conduct a
   reproducible functional analysis of high-throughput sequencing
   data, using the transcriptome of the butterfly species *Pieris
   brassicae*.

.. class:: keywords

   reproducible research, text editor, RNA-seq

Introduction
------------

The ability to independently reproduce published works is central to
the scientific paradigm. In recent years, there has been mounting
concern over the number of studies that are difficult if not
impossible to reproduce [Ioannidis05]_ [Prinz11]_. The
reasons underlying a lack of reproducibility in science are numerous
and it happens that with regards to funding and publication preference
there is an emphasis on discovery with little reward for studies that
reproduce results [Russell13]_.

The difficulties in reproducing a study can be broadly categorized as
experimental and analytic. Whether it is in the laboratory or on a
computer, problems with replication can be minimized through the use
of three key concepts: (1) data sharing, (2) leaving an audit trail
and (3) documentation. Data sharing refers to all raw data and
appropriate metadata, provided under a convenient set of standards,
ideally through a free and open repository, like the Gene Expression
Omnibus [Edgar02]_. Laying an audit trail in the laboratory can be done
through the careful use of electronic notebooks, and for code, as is
already commonplace in many fields, through the use of version control
systems like Git http://git-scm.com or Mercurial
http://mercurial.selenic.com.

Massive data sharing efforts are underway [Butler12]_ and the
advantages of electronic systems for documenting changes are
self-evident. The third aspect, documentation, can be carried out in
the laboratory with electronic notebooks easily enough. However, the
analyses that go along with experiments are far more difficult to
properly document, and unsurprisingly this aspect of reproducible
research remains a major obstacle particularly in the life-sciences.

Apart from data sharing, leaving an audit trail and documentation,
there are other important aspects of reproducible research to consider
such as the over-reliance on p-values [Ioannidis08]_ [Gadbury12]_ and
the use of inappropriate statistical tests. Statistical problems would
be drastically easier for other scientists to identify if the original
data and well-documented code were made readily available. In computer
science, extensively documented code is often produced through the use
of literate programming [Knuth84]_.

In general, literate programming is the mixing of programming code and
prose to produce a final report that reads in a natural way. In this
work, we differ from most of the available resources for literate
programming in that our focus is on producing reports that are
intended for non-programmers, yet still embracing many of the
important tenets of literate programming. For those with an extensive
computing background there are a number of great tools like Org-mode
[Schulte12]_ that are available. Often, biologists, chemists and
other wet-lab scientists, however, lack the time to adequately learn a
complicated environment and the prospect of learning is daunting when
it comes to many of the available tools.  

The environment we have developed here, literate programming edit
(lpEdit), is a cross-platform application that enables a broad range
of scientists to carry out the analytic component of their work in a
reproducible manner. This work is not intended for those already
well-versed in the use of text editors and literate programming
environments, although the simplicity and ability to use either the
application programming interface (API) version or a graphical user
interface (GUI) version has appeal to a variety of researchers.

lpEdit: a literate programming editor
-------------------------------------

Many of the tools available for literate programming do not provide a
graphical editor, which is a barrier for adoption by
non-specialists. Other tools depend on a particular
operating-system and only a handful of tools can switch freely between
several programming languages. The motivation to build lpEdit arose
because there was no apparent library/tool that fit these three
criteria in a simple and intuitive way.  

We have developed here an environment for literate programming, based
on the model-view-controller (MVC) software architecture pattern. The
only major difference from conventional realizations of MVC patterns
is that instead of the user interacting directly with the controller
in a non-GUI mode, we have developed a convenience class called
NoGuiAnalysis for this purpose.

The GUI editor portion of lpEdit is written with PyQt4
http://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt, which are Python
bindings to the widget toolkit Qt http://qt.digia.com. For the basic
editing component of the software we use the Qt port of Scintilla
http://www.scintilla.  org called QScintilla
http://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/qscintilla. The additional
prerequisites are the Python packages for numeric computing (`NumPy`)
[Oliphant07]_ and the ubiquitous documentation tool Sphinx http:
//sphinx-doc.org.  

The software is available under the GNU General Public License version
3.0 or later from
http://bitbucket.org/ajrichards/reproducible-research. The
accompanying documentation can be found at
http://ajrichards.bitbucket.org/lpEdit/index.html.

:math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` and reStructuredText
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Perhaps the most widely used literate programming tool is Sweave
[Leisch02]_ which embeds R code into a :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}`
document. Due to its popularity and because Sweave is now part of the
R project [RCore12]_, the Sweave environment may be used from within
lpEdit. Another notable projects that mixes R and
:math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` is knitr http://yihui.name/knitr. RStudio
[RStudio]_ is a graphical editor that supports Sweave and knitr.

R is a standard language for statistics, but for other common
computational tasks, like text processing and web-applications, it is
used less frequently than scripting languages. We opted to add Python,
a scripting language, because it is being increasingly used in
the life-sciences [Bassi07]_ and because it has a clean syntax that
ultimately aids transparency and reproducibility. Several
well-featured literate programming tools exist for Python including
PyLit http://pylit.berlios.de and like PyLit our software uses
reStructuredText (reST) http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html,
although we additionally allow arbitrary Python code to be included in
:math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` source documents. Another powerful tool for
reproducible research using Python is the IPython notebook [Perez07]_.

There are three types of file extensions currently permitted for use
with lpEdit: the Sweave extension (``*.rnw``); a Noweb [Ramsey94]_
inspired syntax (``*.nw``); and the reST file extension
(``*.rst``). By selecting an embedded language and a file type there
are a number of different workflows available as shown in Figure
:ref:`fig:workflow`.

.. figure:: Workflow.pdf

   **Summary of the possible workflows using lpEdit**. First, a
   language, either R or Python is selected then it is embedded into a
   specific document (``*.rnw``, ``*.nw`` or ``*.rst``). Next a
   :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` or Sphinx project is built for the
   document, which then allows for both HTML and PDF output
   formats. :label:`fig:workflow`

lpEdit as a library
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

lpEdit has a simple API, which facilitates the use of unit testing and
exposes the functions of this library for those who are not in need of
a text editor. In this section, we explain how to create a project and
build reports using the command line, in order to illustrate the basic
mechanics of lpEdit. The following example script, BasicPython.nw, is
bundled with the package lpEdit. To build a project and compile it
into report form only a few commands are needed.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from lpEdit import NoGuiAnalysis
   nga = NoGuiAnalysis()
   nga.load_file("BasicPython.nw",fileLang="python")
   nga.build()
   nga.compile_pdf()
   nga.compile_html()

First the class is imported (line 1) from the module lpEdit and then
it is instantiated (line 2). The file is then loaded and the language
may be specified (line 3). The ``build()`` method creates a directory
to contain the project in the same folder as ``BasicPython.nw``.  The
build-step also creates a `*.tex` document.  This directory is what
lpEdit refers to as a project and it is where both reST and
:math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` projects are managed. The ``compile_pdf()``
command either uses ``sphinx-build`` or ``pdflatex``. The
``compile_html()`` command defaults to ``sphinx-build`` or
``latex2pdf`` depending on the project type. In most cases the default
paths for ``pdflatex``, ``python``, ``R``, and ``sphinx-build`` are
found automatically, however, they may be customized to a user’s
preference. To modify these variables without the GUI, there is a
configuration file corresponding to the current version of lpEdit
located in the user's home directory.

.. code-block:: python

   import os
   os.path.join(os.path.expanduser("~"),".lpEdit")


lpEdit as an editor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The primary purpose of lpEdit as a text editor was to benefit students
and those who are learning to program statistical analyses. In order
to make it easier on these user groups, we provide as part of lpEdit’s
documentation a number of examples that illustrate different
statistical tests. We have left out features found in other editors or
literate programming environments to make it easier to focus on report
content.


Documenting by example
----------------------

Like Sweave, lpEdit uses a Noweb [Ramsey94]_ inspired syntax. The
advantages are that due to a simplified syntax, the flow of the
document is only minimally interrupted by the presence of code. Also,
to reduce the learning burden on new users, we suggest they concentrate
on learning :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}`, reST and the embedded programming
language of choice instead of lpEdit-specific tricks to embed plots,
tables or other convenient features. For ``*.rnw``, ``*.nw`` and
``*.rst`` documents, we embed code in the following way.

.. sourcecode::

   <<label=code-chunk-1>>=
   print("Hello World!")
   @

Although this particular example may not be executed in lpEdit because
it is not a valid :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}` or reST document, it
illustrates that code, in this case just a print statement, is
included by placing it between "<< txt >>=" and "@", where ``txt`` is
any arbitrary string, preferably something informative. Note that
under Sweave ``txt`` is a place where options may be passed.  Refer to the
official documentation for more comprehensive examples.

Documents written in :math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}`, or reST are written as
they normally would be although now there is a way to execute embedded
code within the document. There is no limit to the number of code
chunks and lpEdit will execute them in sequential order, preserving
the variable space. The building step is where code chunks are
executed and output gathered. There is one thing to keep in mind when
working with projects, and that is the idea of scope. Suppose, there
are two documents ``document1.rst`` and ``document2.rst``. If we build
``document1.rst`` then ``document2.rst``, the results from
``document1.rst`` will be preserved, which is convenient when there
are code chunks that take significant time to run.


Involved analyses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Analyses can take the form of long complicated pipelines, that may not
reasonably be reproduced at the click of a button. This may happen if,
for example, a database needs to be populated before an analysis can be
carried out or perhaps there is a hardware constraint, such as the
requirement of a high-performance computing infrastructure. In these
cases, lpEdit or another documentation software may still be used to
document details that would not normally be present in the methods
section of a published manuscript. For analyses that are accompanied
by substantial code and/or data, we provide the keyword INCLUDE which
simply tells lpEdit that a given file is part of the current
project. For example, files may be included in a ``*.nw`` or ``*.rnw``
document by 

.. sourcecode::

   %INCLUDE MyFunctions.py, MyData.csv

where the ``INCLUDE`` statement is preceded by a comment
indicator. For reST documents ".. " is used. At build time symbolic
links are created. For a reST document, ``INCLUDE`` is preceded by the
comment indicator. With increasingly involved analyses, the
readability of documentation should not deteriorate and to this end
prose may be simplified by including code and data as links. Other
than ``INCLUDE`` and the syntax to embed code, reST and
:math:`\textrm{\LaTeX}`, documents are written as they normally would
be, which has the important benefit of minimizing the learning burden.


Analyzing the *Pieris brassicae* transcriptome
----------------------------------------------

The analysis of high-throughput sequencing data has the earmarks of a
highly involved analysis pipeline. The appeal of high-performance
sequencing [Margulies05]_, referred to as RNA-seq, when applied to
messenger RNA, is that a large number of genes are quickly examined in
terms of both expression and genetic polymorphisms. For RNA-seq the
sheer quantity of data and diversity of analysis pipelines can be
overwhelming, which substantiates all the more a need for transparent
analysis documentation. Here we describe the transcriptome of the
cabbage butterfly (*Pieris brassicae*) [Feltwell82]_, a species prevalent
throughout much of Europe, that is an interesting model for studying
species mobility with respect to different selection pressures [Ducatez12]_.

cDNA library construction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Messenger RNA was extracted from the thorax, head and limbs of 12 male
and female *P. brassicae* and pooled to construct a normalized cDNA
library (BioS&T, Montreal, Canada). This library was subsequently
sequenced using a Roche 454 pyrosequencing platform and because there
is no reference genome for *P. brassicae* a *de novo* assembly
pipeline was followed. The sequencing and assembly was carried out at
the sequencing center Genotoul http://bioinfo.genotoul.fr and made
available using the NG6 [Mariette12]_ software environment. Prior to
assembly, the reads were filtered to ensure quality-a step that
included a correction for replicate bias [Mariette11]_. The assembler
Newbler [Margulies05]_, was then used to align and order the reads
into 16,889 isotigs and 11,891 isogroups.

Analysis database and environment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because *P. brassicae* is a species without a reference genome, the
assembled isotigs must be compared to species that have functional
descriptions. In order to make time-efficient comparisons we first
created a database using PostgreSQL http://postgresql.org (version
9.1.9). The database contained gene, accession, taxon, and functional
ontology information all of which is available through the National
Center for Biotechnology Infomation (NCBI) FTP site
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Ftp. The database is detailed in Figure
:ref:`fig:schemadb`. The interaction with tables in the database was
simplified through the use of the object relational mapper available
as part of the python package SQLAlchemy http://www.sqlalchemy.org.
The schema figure was generated using the Python package
`sqlalchemy_schemadisplay`
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/sqlalchemy_schemadisplay.

.. figure:: SchemaDB.pdf

   **Database entity diagram**. A gene-centric relational database for
   data available through NCBI’s FTP website. :label:`fig:schemadb`


Functional characterization of the transcriptome
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For each isotig, functional annotations were found by using the Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) [Altschul90]_ via NCBI's BLAST+
command line interface [Camacho09]_. Specifically, each isotig was
locally aligned to every sequence in the Swiss-Prot database
[UniProtConsortium12]_ then using our local database, accession names
were mapped to gene names and corresponding functional annotations
were gathered. The handling of sequence data was done using the
classes and functions provided by BioPython [Cock09]_. 

Of the nearly 17,000 isotigs that were examined, 11,846 were considered hits
(E-value :math:`\leq` 0.04). The isotigs were then mapped to 6901
unique genes. The appropriate Gene Ontology [Ashburner00]_ annotations
were then mapped back to the isotigs. A navigable version of the
analyses and results is available as part of the online supplement
http://ajrichards.bitbucket.org/lpedit-supplement.  The supplement is
the documentation produced using lpEdit. All scripts that were used in
this analysis are provided therein and the supplement details the
individual steps in this process in a way that is impossible to
include as part of a manuscript methods section.

Conclusions and future work
---------------------------

The RNA-seq example demonstrates that involved analyses may be well-
documented in a way that is interesting for those who understand the
technical details of the analysis and those who do not. In the
future, more languages, even compiled ones, may be integrated into the
project, which is feasible because lpEdit uses the Python package
``subprocess`` to make arbitrary system calls. It is not our intention
for lpEdit to evolve to be a replacement for already established
tools, like Org-mode. Rather, it is meant as a simple tool to help
newcomers with programming and statistics. With the API version of
lpEdit there remains the possibility that it may be adapted as a
plug-in or extension to existing text editors.  

Given that the target user-base for lpEdit are those with limited
computing background, there are a number of power-user features left
out of the current version for the sake of a nearly ‘push button
approach’. Despite this restricted approach, lpEdit is free to use,
fork and modify as the community would like and over time more
interesting features will make it into the project without sacrificing
the important idea of simplicity. Being a community-driven effort, we
are open to feature requests and will adapt to the needs of the
general user population.

Acknowledgments
---------------

We would like to thank Eric Pante and Michel Baguette for helpful
comments and discussion. The research carried out here was partially
supported by the Duke Cancer Institute (DCI). Additional support for
this work was provided by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR;
France) MOBIGEN [ANR- 09-PEXT-003]. The opinions, findings and
recommendations expressed in this work are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the DCI, CNRS or other affiliated
organizations.

References
----------

.. [Altschul90] S. F. Altschul, W Gish, W Miller, E W Myers, and D. J. Lipman. *Basic local alignment search tool*,
                Journal of Molecular Biology, 215:403-410, 1990.

.. [Ashburner00] M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. S. Dwight, 
		 J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. Issel-Tarver, A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, J. E. Richardson, M. Ringwald,
		 G. M. Rubin, and G. Sherlock. *Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology*, Nature Genetics, 25(1):25-29, May 2000.

.. [Bassi07] S. Bassi. *A primer on python for life science researchers*, 
	     PLoS Computational Biology, 3(11):e199, 2007.

.. [Butler12] D. Butler. *Drug firm to share raw trial data*, 
	      Nature, 490(7420):322, Oct 2012.

.. [Camacho09] C. Camacho, G. Coulouris, V. Avagyan, N. Ma, J. Papadopoulos, K. Bealer, and T. L. Madden.
	       *BLAST+: architecture and applications*, BMC Bioinformatics, 10:421, 2009.

.. [Cock09] P. J. A. Cock, T. Antao, J. T. Chang, B. A. Chapman, C. J. Cox, A. Dalke, I. Friedberg, T. Hamelryck, F. Kauff, B. Wilczynski, and M. J. L. de Hoon. *Biopython: freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics*,
	    Bioinformatics, 25(11):1422-1423, Jun 2009. 

.. [Ducatez12] S. Ducatez, M. Baguette, V. M. Stevens, D. Legrand, and H. Freville. *Complex interactions between paternal and maternal effects: parental experience and age at reproduction affect fecundity and offspring performance in a butterfly*,
	       Evolution, 66(11):3558-3569, Nov 2012.

.. [Edgar02] R. Edgar, M Domrachev, and A E Lash. *Gene expression omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository*, 
	     Nucleic Acids Research, 30(1):207-210, Jan 2002.

.. [Feltwell82] J. Feltwell. *Large white butterfly: The Biology, Biochemistry and Physiology of Pieris brassicae (Linnaeus)*,
		Springer, 1982.

.. [Gadbury12] G. L. Gadbury and D. B. Allison. 
	       *Inappropriate fiddling with statistical analyses to obtain a desirable p-value: tests to detect its presence in published literature*, 
	       PloS One, 7(10):e46363, 2012.

.. [Ioannidis05] J. P. A. Ioannidis. *Why most published research findings are false*, 
		 PLoS Medicine, 2(8):e124, Aug 2005.

.. [Ioannidis08] J. P. A. Ioannidis. *Effect of formal statistical significance on the credibility of observational associations*,
		 American Journal of Epidemiology, 168(4):374-383; discussion 384-390, Aug 2008.

.. [Knuth84] D. E. Knuth. *Literate programming*,
	     The Computer Journal, 27:97-111, 1984.

.. [Leisch02] F. Leisch. *Sweave: Dynamic generation of statistical reports using literate data analysis*,
	      In Comp-stat 2002 - Proceedings in Computational Statistics, pages 575–580. Physica Verlag, Heidelberg, 2002.

.. [Margulies05] M. Margulies, M. Egholm, W. E. Altman, S. Attiya, J. S. Bader, L. A. Bemben, J. Berka, M. S. Braverman, 
		 Y-J. Chen, Z. Chen, S. B. Dewell, L. Du, J. M. Fierro, X. V. Gomes, B. C. Godwin, W. He, S. Helgesen,
		 C. H. Ho, G. P. Irzyk, S. C. Jando, M. L. I. Alenquer, T. P. Jarvie, K. B. Jirage, J-B. Kim, J. R. Knight,
		 J. R. Lanza, J. H. Leamon, S. M. Lefkowitz, M. Lei, J. Li, K. L. Lohman, H. Lu, V. B. Makhijani, K. E. McDade,
		 M. P. McKenna, E. W. Myers, E. Nickerson, J. R. Nobile, R. Plant, B. P. Puc, M. T. Ronan, G. T. Roth,
		 G. J. Sarkis, J. F. Simons, J. W. Simpson, M. Srinivasan, K. R. Tartaro, A. Tomasz, K. A. Vogt, G. A. Volkmer,
		 S. H. Wang, Y. Wang, M. P. Weiner, P. Yu, R. F. Begley, and J. M. Rothberg.
		 *Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors*, Nature, 437(7057):376-380, Sep 2005.

.. [Mariette11] J. Mariette, C. Noirot, and C. Klopp. *Assessment of replicate bias in 454 pyrosequencing and a multi-purpose read-filtering tool*,
		BMC Research Notes, 4:149, 2011.

.. [Mariette12] J. Mariette, F. Escudie, N. Allias, G. Salin, C. Noirot, S. Thomas, and C. Klopp.
		*NG6: Integrated next generation sequencing storage and pro cessing environment*, BMC Genomics, 13:462, 2012.

.. [Oliphant07] T. E. Oliphant. *Python for scientific computing*,
		Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):10-20, 2007.

.. [Perez07] F. Perez and B. E. Granger. *IPython: a system for interactive scientific computing*,
	     Computing in Science & Engineering,  9(3):21-29, May 2007.

.. [Prinz11] F. Prinz, T. Schlange, and K. Asadullah. *Believe it or not: how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets?*,
	     Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery, 10(9):712, Sep 2011.

.. [RCore12]  R Core Team. *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing*,
	      R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2012.

.. [RStudio] *RStudio: Integrated development environment for R*,
	     Boston, MA.

.. [Ramsey94] N. Ramsey. *Literate programming simplified*,
	      IEEE Software, 11(5):97-105, 1994.

.. [Russell13] J. F. Russell. *If a job is worth doing, it is worth doing twice*,
	       Nature, 496(7443):7, Apr 2013.

.. [Schulte12] E. Schulte, D. Davison, T. Dye, and C. Dominik. *A multi-language computing environment for literate programming and reproducible research*,
	       Journal of Statistical Software, 46(3):1-24, 1 2012.

.. [UniProtConsortium12] UniProt Consortium. *Reorganizing the protein space at the universal protein resource (UniProt)*,
			 Nucleic Acids Research, 40(Database issue):D71-5, Jan 2012.
