:author: Mark Wiebe
:email: mwiebe@continuum.io
:institution: Continuum Analytics

:author: Andy Terrel
:email: aterrel@continuum.io
:institution: Continuum Analytics

:author: Matthew Rocklin
:email: mrocklin@continuum.io
:institution: Continuum Analytics

:author: TJ Alumbaugh
:email: tj.alumbaugh@continuum.io
:institution: Continuum Analytics

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Blaze: Building A Foundation for Array-Oriented Computing in Python
-------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

Python’s scientific computing and data analysis ecosystem, built around NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib, Pandas, and a host of other libraries, is a tremendous success. NumPy provides an array object, the array-oriented ufunc primitive, and standard practices for exposing and writing numerical libraries to Python all of which have assisted in making it a solid foundation for the community. Over time, however, it has become clear that there are some limitations of NumPy that are difficult to address via evolution from within. Notably, the way NumPy arrays are restricted to data with regularly strided memory structure on a single machine is not easy to change.

Blaze is a project being built with the goal of addressing these limitations, and becoming a foundation to grow Python’s success in array-oriented computing long into the future. It consists of a small collection of libraries being built to generalize NumPy’s notions of array, dtype, and ufuncs to be more extensible, and to represent data and computation that is distributed or does not fit in main memory.

TODO: refine the following paragraph to current architecture

Datashape is the array type system that describes the structure of data, including a specification of a grammar and set of basic types, and a library for working with them. LibDyND is an in-memory array programming library, written in C++ and exposed to Python to provide the local representation of memory supporting the datashape array types. BLZ is a chunked column-oriented persistence storage format for storing Blaze data, well-suited for out of core computations. Finally, the Blaze library ties these components together with a deferred execution graph and execution engine, which can analyze desired computations together with the location and size of input data, and carry out an execution plan in memory, out of core, or in a distributed fashion as is needed.


.. class:: keywords

   array programming, big data, numpy, scipy, pandas

Introduction
------------

* History of array-oriented programming, leading up to NumPy/SciPy/Pandas.

* Growth of data analysis outside of the Python world: Hadoop, R, Julia, etc.

* Describe the data structures/abstractions (array, relational table, data
  frame) being used in different fields (scientific computing, statistical
  analysis, data mining)

* Blaze defines abstractions for array-oriented programming and then provides
  hooks to existing systems.  We hope that, like numpy, this standard interface
  spurs a new iteration of data analytics libraries.

Blaze Architecture
------------------

Blaze separates data analytics into three isolated components:

* Data access: efficient access across different storage systems, ``CSV``,
  ``HDF5``, ``HDFS``, ....
* Symbolic Expression: symbolic reasoning about the desired result, ``Join``, ``Sum``,
  ``Split-Apply-Combine``, ....
* Backend Computation: how to perform computations on a variety of backends (``SQL``,
  ``Pandas``, ``Spark``, ....

We isolate these elements to enble experts to create well crafted solutions in
each domain without needing understanding the others, e.g. a Pandas expert can
contribute without knowing Spark and vice versa.  We provide abstraction layers
between these components to enable them to work together cleanly.

This process results in a multi-format, multi-backend computational engine
capable of common data analytics operations.


Blaze Data
~~~~~~~~~~

* Defines interface for reading/writing data describable with datashape.

* Brief description description of datashape as combination of shape and
  dtype from NumPy, plus more general dimensions and additional dtypes.

* Two mechanisms to stream data: as Python objects, and higher performance
  via DyND array chunks.

* Plugin mechanism to define new data formats.

* LibDyND subsection describing how its implementation of in-memory datashaped
  data provides glue for efficient chunked iteration, converting types, etc.

Blaze Expr
~~~~~~~~~~

* Abstract expression tree representation, generated by the Table and
  Array objects or created/manipulated directly.

* Represents computations commonly done via SQL, NumPy, Pandas, etc.

Blaze Compute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Maps blaze expression trees to backends.

* Accounts for differences in naming of similar computations.

* Serves as common repository for common analytics pattens (e.g.
  split-apply-combine) in each backend.

* Multiple dispatch mechanism to connect to new backends and define
  interactions between heterogeneous backends.

Blaze Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Table and Array objects with pandas/numpy-like interfaces, to provide
  friendly interfaces for domain experts whose primary focus is not programming.

Experiment
----------

* We sketch out a simple data analytics computation with exprs, perhaps
  split-apply-combine + Join on some bitcoin data.

* We run this computation on a scale of data sizes on several backends
  (streaming Python, Pandas, SQLite, Spark) and provide performance numbers

* We compare the backends for performance and scalability, noting that Blaze
  allows you to select the backend that best suits your needs and allows you to
  transition when its time.


Conclusion
----------


.. Customised LaTeX packages
.. -------------------------

.. Please avoid using this feature, unless agreed upon with the
.. proceedings editors.

.. ::

..   .. latex::
..      :usepackage: somepackage

..      Some custom LaTeX source here.

References
----------
.. [Atr03] P. Atreides. *How to catch a sandworm*,
           Transactions on Terraforming, 21(3):261-300, August 2003.

